[MUSIC PLAYING]
>>LISA GARR: According to the
World Health Organization's
ranking of the world
health systems,
America is ranked 37th,
despite spending $3.2 trillion
on health care.
Hi, I'm Lisa Garr.
And the one thing
I know for sure
is education and information is
a great solution for self care
and really getting beneath
the surface when it
comes to your personal health.
Joining me is
pharmacist, nutritionist,
and cosmetic chemist
Ben Fuchs, who
has written thousands
of online articles,
to talk about the top
health myths and solutions.
Hi, welcome.
>>BEN FUCHS: Thank you.
>>LISA: So tell me, how
did you get so interested
in your level of health?
I mean, you're really
detailed about it.
>>FUCHS: You know, I'm
not really into health.
Health is one aspect
of what I talk about.
Everything I talk about, and
I talk about a lot of things,
as you know, has one
theme, has a line
that runs underneath all these
various, seemingly diverse
topics.
And that's empowerment.
I want to leave my
mark on the world
so that the world is better
because I was in it--
>>LISA: Yeah.
>>FUCHS: --people are more
powerful because I somehow
existed.
And so everything I
do is not necessarily
about health, although
that's one aspect of it.
>>LISA: Ultimately, that
is the goal, that you
left an incredible mark.
So right now, health has
so many different types
of stigmas around it.
I mentioned that
statistic earlier.
Health care in America,
I mean, it really
has a lot of
confusion around it.
>>FUCHS: There's
something wrong.
>>LISA: Yes, there's
something wrong,
which makes me think
it's gotta get back
into the hands of the people.
>>FUCHS: Well, education is a
big part, like you were saying.
>>LISA: Right.
>>FUCHS: Education and
information is a big part.
And the word "education"
is very interesting to me.
And I love words.
I'm kind of a wordsmith.
And I always like the
derivation of words.
And "education" is a
really interesting word.
It comes from the root "educt,"
which means "to pull out."
>>LISA: Mm-hm.
>>FUCHS: So when you educate,
when you're truly educating,
you're not telling
somebody anything.
You're pulling out of them
what they already know.
>>LISA: Right.
>>FUCHS: And so when we educate
about health, what we're doing
is really telling people things
that, intuitively, they know.
Intuitively, they know that
they have to eat a certain way.
Intuitively they know
they have to exercise.
Intuitively, they know that
they have to use supplements
or they have to have
correct thoughts.
And you're not telling
anybody anything weird.
But we have a medical
model in place
that we trust that doesn't
emphasize that idea
of education and information.
You know, the original meaning
of "doctor" is educator.
The word "doctor"
means "to educate."
And so a true doctor
is an educator.
A true doctor is somebody who
pulls out wisdom out of you
that you already know.
So the reason we have
such a problem, I believe,
is because we've lost
sight of the fact
that we don't need
to be medicalizing.
We need to be educating.
We need to be informing.
We need to be telling
people about their bodies.
This is why I say what I
do is about empowerment.
Because I share information
that makes people more powerful.
And that's why when I
do my presentations now
via YouTube and on the
internet, there's a certain--
people feel stronger.
They feel better when
they listen to it.
And that's why people pay
attention to what I'm saying.
It's because the ideas
that I talk about
are ideas that you can take
on to make yourself stronger,
to make yourself better,
to make yourself healthier,
to make yourself
all the good things,
and ultimately, to make
yourself more powerful.
>>LISA: It makes sense the way
that you describe it, though.
You talk about, it's not just
about vitamins and supplements.
>>FUCHS: Absolutely.
>>LISA: It's about what's
beneath the surface there.
>>FUCHS: The invisible world.
>>LISA: Tell me about that.
>>FUCHS: The visible
world is always derived
from the invisible world.
You know, the idea that all
there is is the visible world
is materialism.
And that says that
everything is material.
>>LISA: Uh-huh.
>>FUCHS: But if
you know anything
about science, and
as a chemist, you
know, when I first heard
about biochemistry,
I became very spiritual.
I literally had an epiphany.
In the middle of the classroom,
I wanted to get on my knees
and praise God when I heard
about biochemistry, when
it first dawned on me that all
of these chemical reactions
were happening in every cell
of your body constantly,
trillions of times a second,
not even trillions, trillions
upon trillions upon
trillions of times a second
with an intelligence
that allowed
them to do it on their own.
You don't have to think
about any of these chemical--
>>LISA: It is
incredible isn't it?
>>FUCHS: It's just the most
mind-boggling thing to me.
>>LISA: Mm-hm.
>>FUCHS: So, you
know, to me we are
marginalizing our magnificence.
We are not sitting with
the miraculous nature
of what we are.
>>LISA: I get that.
I have always been amazed
by the innate intelligence
of the body.
>>FUCHS: Yes.
>>LISA: Even from the embryo.
>>FUCHS: Yes, how that happened.
>>LISA: And how cell knows
to go to the hand and the--
>>FUCHS: How?
>>LISA: I was watching
my baby develop.
And now that we get to see
these brilliant ultrasounds,
you just look at that
and you're in awe.
>>FUCHS: Yes, yes.
This is what religion
should really be.
>>LISA: Yeah.
>>FUCHS: This is
the true religion.
So to me, the miraculous
nature of the human body,
it's a metaphor for
the unbelievable nature
of the world.
And so when you're talking
about this whole idea
of the invisible world and
the visible world, all of that
arises from something
that is invisible.
And we can understand
it by implication.
Because we're not thinking,
you're not making your liver.
Something's doing your liver.
>>LISA: Right now.
>>FUCHS: It's not you, right?
Something is doing your body.
But we know through science,
through quantum, you know,
we know that at the
level of reality
we see is the end result
of quantum phenomena
that are not even microscopic.
They are not even
sub-microscopic.
They are happening at the
tiniest of the tiniest levels.
And even that, before that,
you're into empty space.
So now empty space is being
turned into the visible world.
So this idea that
the invisible world
leads to the visible world
flies in the face of what
the medical model teaches us.
Because the medical model
was birthed at a time
that represents historically
the culmination of materialism.
See, materialism
really didn't get
going-- it started, roughly,
around the Enlightenment,
like the 1600s, right?
And it got going.
It got going and going.
And it peaked in the late 1800s,
to the point where they wanted
to close the patent office.
They thought they
knew everything
about every invention
that's ever been done.
All physics has already
been discovered.
And then, lo and behold, they
discover quantum physics.
But medicine was
birthed at the time
of this peak of materialism.
And in fairness, it
was pretty amazing
compared to the Middle Ages.
Materialism gave us electricity.
It gave us the telegraph.
It gave us, you
know, anesthesia.
It gave us some wonderful
things compared to what life
was like in the Middle Ages.
But that was the end of it.
It did what it could do.
And then, we moved
on, scientifically,
to the quantum age.
Now, the quantum age is not--
it sounds kind of airy-fairy
and abstract and not really
relevant.
But our CDs work
with quantum physics.
Our iPhones work
We interact with
quantum physics,
the verities of quantum physics
every minute of our lives.
But medicine is still stuck
in the model of materialism.
>>LISA: Right, it's
not in frequency--
Although, they use frequency.
>>FUCHS: Well, they use it
for the ends of medicine,
to take an organ out or to see
what's happening in an organ.
>>LISA: Or medical imaging.
>>FUCHS: Not to align
your frequencies
or not to align your energies.
You know, and you
don't need machines
to do any of that stuff.
That's the problem,
is the institution
of medicine is an institution.
The word "institution" comes
from the word "static,"
to stay the same.
And this is a great
battle that exists
at all times, institutions
versus the individual.
The institutions of government,
the institutions of law,
the institutions of banking,
the institutions of medicine
are all there to
perpetuate themselves.
And the individual is
just there as a resource
for the institution.
And this happens with
all institutions.
And an end result is that you
have an institution of medicine
that prides itself
on how wonderful it
is that has led to a
situation where we have
the sickest culture in
the history of the planet,
literally, the most obese
culture, the most cancer
ridden, the most
diabetic culture.
>>LISA: And out of touch.
>>FUCHS: That's another factor.
Because it takes
you out of touch.
To medicalize takes
>>LISA: Oh, it does.
>>FUCHS: Medicine
is the middle man.
The word "med"
comes from "middle."
>>LISA: Right.
>>FUCHS: It's a
middle man between,
it's like, in the old days,
the priest was the middle man
between God and you.
Now, the medical
man is the interface
between you and your body.
>>LISA: Well, it's kind
of a broken system.
You go to a doctor.
And they have 15 minutes
to tell you everything
that they possibly can.
>>FUCHS: It's a broken system.
>>LISA: And you just
listen and then you
have to listen and hear
everything they say.
>>FUCHS: All that.
>>LISA: Take it all in.
And then you just say,
OK, I'll do what you said.
>>FUCHS: I should tell you,
there's two kinds of diseases.
There's two kinds of
bodily breakdowns,
two kinds of traumas
that the body can suffer.
There's chronic trauma,
long term trauma and there's
short term, accidents
and things falling--
>>LISA: Acute.
>>FUCHS: --on your head.
Acute, right.
So in pharmacy, we say
there's two kinds of medicine.
We say there's heroic
medicine and there's
ambulatory medicine.
Heroic medicine is the medicine
of the hero, save your life.
You get hit in the
head, you break
your leg, something
you need stitched up,
praise God for the surgeons.
>>LISA: Great.
>>FUCHS: OK, praise God for
that kind of modern medicine.
But there's a second
kind of disease
that has really only hit us over
the last 5,000 to 10,000 years.
And we didn't really
grow up with it.
And that's chronic
degenerative disease.
>>LISA: Yeah.
>>FUCHS: If modern medicine gets
an A-plus for treating broken
bones, which it does,
and repairing things--
>>LISA: Triage.
>>FUCHS: --and stitching
things back on.
And if it gets an A-plus
here, it gets an F-minus here.
Modern medicine is riding on
the coattails of penicillin,
is what I like to say.
As penicillin came around,
and if you can remember,
if you can imagine how
life was before penicillin,
you know, you catch a
cold, you were dead.
You could potentially die.
You know, babies
died all the time.
People would have six
babies, six children and five
of them would die before they--
>>LISA: Wow.
>>FUCHS: Can imagine
the world that way?
And you never knew when
it was gonna happen.
>>LISA: Uh-huh.
>>FUCHS: Can you imagine
living this way, right?
So then, penicillin came
along, and it was all over.
So people got the
idea that medicine--
>>LISA: Fixes everything.
>>FUCHS: Everything.
And so what happened was
because the drug companies were
entrenched and there
was a lot of money
to be made in medicine-- the
profit margin on medicine
is ungodly.
It's ridiculous.
You can't even imagine
what the profit margin is.
>>LISA: We hear
about it in the news.
>>FUCHS: It's ridiculous.
>>LISA: Ridiculous.
>>FUCHS: So the
pharmaceutical companies
start to try to
discover more and more.
And then they had
to create markets.
So they had to create diseases.
And they weren't
interested necessarily
in helping people with things
that would really help them,
with causes, but rather
keeping them riding along
the pharmaceutical gravy train.
So they got their
statin drug every month.
They get their diabetes
drug every month,
you get your thyroid--
You know, the worst
thing I ever hear,
one of the most
horrifying things I hear
is when people
say, my doctor told
I'm gonna be on that drug
for the rest of my life.
>>LISA: Yes.
>>FUCHS: And I always tell
people, if you're on a drug,
your number-one health
goal is to figure out
how to get off that drug.
Because I'm telling you
this as a pharmacist,
there isn't a single
prescription drug
that can not only not fix your
chronic degenerative disease,
but that is not going to
cause, in the long term,
a toxicity and/or a
nutritional deficiency.
>>LISA: There isn't
one single drug.
>>FUCHS: Not one single drug.
>>LISA: So no matter
them saying it's benign,
that this doesn't have
any side effects--
>>FUCHS: No benign, no benign.
>>LISA: There's no such thing.
>>FUCHS: Because when
your body takes a drug,
the number-one side
effect of drugs
is nausea and
vomiting and diarrhea.
Why?
Because when you take a drug,
your body wants that out of you
quickly.
And when they dose
you with a drug,
they have to dose you at a
dose that is 10 times higher
than the dose your body is
using because your liver will
immediately clear that drug out.
>>LISA: Oh.
>>FUCHS: So they have to
give you an extra high dose
because your body is
like, I don't want you.
I want you out of here.
This is the nature of drugs.
So when you take a prescription
drug, the most gentle, benign
whatever, no side effects,
what you're not being told
is your vitamin C has
to go to your liver
to detoxify that drug so
it's not in your heart.
Your B complex has to be
used to detoxify the drug,
your magnesium, your copper.
You run higher risks of
nutritional deficiency states
after you take your drug
because your body is allocating
its precious resources to
the detoxification machinery
to get that stuff
out of your system.
And that doesn't show
up on the side effects.
That doesn't show
up as a side effect.
>>LISA: Interesting, so if
we were to learn that most
of our healing had to
do with our emotional
and our physical--
>>FUCHS: SMEP.
I call it SMEP.
Spiritual, mental,
emotional, physical.
Health has all
dimensions in place.
>>LISA: There's
no profit in that.
>>FUCHS: You can-- Look, right
now, your body is breaking down
as you're talking to me.
But it's also building up.
At any given moment, your body
is in this balance of breakdown
and build up.
And what we say in chemistry,
we say anabolism and catabolism.
You may have heard
of anabolic steroids.
>>LISA: Mm-hm.
>>FUCHS: So "anabolism"
means "building."
"Catabolism" means
"breaking down."
At any given moment, you
are in this dynamic dance
of anabolism and catabolism.
And when you're young and
beautiful and healthy,
you're way anabolic,
net anabolic.
You're net building.
>>LISA: Growing, growing.
>>FUCHS: You're building.
You're still breaking down,
but you're net anabolic.
As we age, that reverses.
So the point is is
that we have access
to these anabolic systems
because we're constantly
building anyway.
So what we want to do is we
want to amplify and enhance
the anabolism.
That's what disease is.
Disease is when
you're net catabolic.
You're net breaking down.
So what we want do is
we want to figure out
how to reverse that equation.
The body can turn on a dime.
>>LISA: Really?
>>FUCHS: But we need
to turn on a dime.
>>LISA: No matter
what age, it can?
>>FUCHS: Depending.
>>LISA: OK.
>>FUCHS: I believe,
theoretically,
I don't see why it shouldn't.
>>LISA: You could slow it down.
>>FUCHS: We should be able
slow it down, theoretically.
Theoretically, I mean,
if you believe that idea,
you should be able to do it.
Now, we live in
a polluted world.
We live in a world that's got--
we have to drink polluted water.
We got to eat polluted food.
We got to breathe polluted
air, not to mention
all the spiritual assaults
and the mental assaults
and the emotional assaults.
So we're never going to be able
to test that theory that we
can live forever.
But we can certainly age
much more gracefully.
We don't have to break down as
fast as we're breaking down.
Do you know this is the
third year in a row where
life expectancy is dropping?
OK, I just read it today.
>>LISA: Wow.
>>FUCHS: Third year in a row
where life expectancy-- where
the further generations
are not going
live-- this is the first
time this has ever happened,
the last couple of years.
>>LISA: That makes sense.
What is the story behind the
Gordian knot, the loop and--
>>FUCHS: Well, I'll give
you the abbreviated version.
Because I don't really know
the whole detailed version.
But I'll tell you
the point of it.
So Alexander the Great
was doing his little thing
in 400 BC or 300 BC,
whenever he was doing it.
And he came to this country.
And he found an ox cart
that was tied to a tree.
And he said, what is this
ox cart tied to a tree?
And he says, well,
somebody left this ox
cart tied to this tree
with this heavy duty knot.
And the legend is, whoever
can untie this knot, whoever
can get this ox
cart off this tree
is going to become
King of Gordia.
And people had been coming for
decades maybe even centuries
to try to untie this
knot so they could
become King of Gordia
and to untie the knot
and get the cart out.
And they couldn't
do it because it
was an incredibly complex knot.
And so Alexander the
Great, being Alexander
the Great trained by Socrates
and being great and all that,
right, he goes, oh, yeah?
Takes out his knife,
he goes [VOCALIZING]..
>>LISA: [LAUGHING]
>>FUCHS: And he cuts
the knot, right?
I'm King of Gordia, right?
And that's the story
of the Gordian knot.
The point being is you don't
need to untie a bunch of knots.
You just need to
cut to the chase.
And when it comes
to health, we've
got all these diagnostics
and drugs and testing
and doctors and specialists
and all of this.
We know all the molecular
interactions that take place
at the sub-cellular level.
And I go to the library,
medical library.
I love going to the
And they have books
and books and books
and everything you
could possibly know,
every enzyme reaction and every
interaction between chemicals.
>>LISA: Sure.
>>FUCHS: We have
all this wisdom.
But we're so sick because we're
worried about how many angels
can dance on the head
of a pin when we just
got to cut to the chase.
The cut to the
chase in the body is
how does the body, from a
physical perspective, what
is the most fragile and
vulnerable junction in the body
from a physical perspective?
In other words, the
body lives in the outs--
This is us, and we
live in a world.
>>LISA: Yes.
>>FUCHS: What is
the juncture, what
is the interaction
point between the world
and our body from
a physical level?
The gut.
>>LISA: OK.
>>FUCHS: This is the
core of everything.
>>LISA: Oh, interesting.
>>FUCHS: This is the
core of all diseases
because this is where
the outside world meets
the inside world.
>>LISA: We internalize things.
>>FUCHS: We internalize food.
Well, yes, because this is
the solar plexus center.
And there's a whole
spiritual idea here, as well.
And this is your major
nerve plexus, here,
next to your brain.
>>LISA: Mm-hm, mental.
>>FUCHS: This is
the second brain.
>>LISA: Mm-hm.
>>FUCHS: But from a purely
physical perspective,
what we put in our
body through our mouth
is the critical nexus between
health and lack thereof.
That's how you slice
the Gordian knot.
And I deal with
people all the time
who have got multiple
health challenges.
You should see
the letters I get.
And I get hundreds
of letters a month.
People have high blood pressure
and diabetes and thyroid
problems and blindness and
their hair is falling out
and they can't walk.
I mean, it's endless.
And some of these,
this is the same person
with all of these things.
>>LISA: Mm-hm.
>>FUCHS: So what do you do?
If you go to the
medical model, you'll
go to an endocrinologist.
You'll go to a GI specialist.
>>LISA: Yes.
>>FUCHS: You'll go
to an orthopedic guy.
You'll go to this
doctor and that doctor.
You have this test
and that test.
They'll give you
this drug and that--
>>LISA: Chasing the illness.
>>FUCHS: Cut to the chase,
slice the Gordian knot,
go right to your gut
from a physical level.
>>LISA: Really?
All things stem from that?
>>FUCHS: Fast for three days.
Watch what happens.
At that's for all
disease, all diseases.
And I could tell you the
mech-- and it's fascinating.
I don't want to brush off
the mechanics behind it
or the science behind it.
>>LISA: No, I want to hear it.
>>FUCHS: The gut is where
the major determining factor
between whether your
interpretation of the world
is safe or not safe resides.
You have a defensive
system in your body
that interprets everything
as safe or not safe.
What is that defensive
system called?
It's called your immune system.
>>LISA: Oh, OK.
>>FUCHS: OK?
So your immune system is
your defensive system.
It is the major system
in the body that
determines whether
the world is safe
or whether what you're
doing is safe or not safe.
>>LISA: OK.
>>FUCHS: The immune system
is housed in the gut.
It lives in the gut.
All disease, you probably
heard this term--
and I'm talking here now
chronic, degenerative disease,
diabetes, Alzheimer's disease--
all diseases have some
basis in an I-word
that everybody talks about but
nobody ever says what it is.
And that's inflammation.
>>LISA: Yes.
>>FUCHS: Right?
>>LISA: Yes?
For sure.
>>FUCHS: But what
is inflammation?
Right?
>>LISA: Your body's
reaction to something.
>>FUCHS: But
specifically, what is it?
Yes, it's a reaction.
That's exactly what it is.
You go to the doctor.
If you go to
medical school, they
say dolor, calor, rubor, tumor.
"Dolor" means pain.
"Calor" means heat.
"Rubor" means redness.
"Tumor" means swelling.
OK, that's the four markers
that doctors will tell you.
>>LISA: OK.
>>FUCHS: You learn
that in medical school.
But inflammation can really be
simplified as a beaver's damn.
It's a way the body
protects itself.
>>LISA: OK.
>>FUCHS: It's a wall.
It's an airbag in your car.
And that's what inflammation is.
It's the calling card
or the manifestation
of the immune system.
All diseases have this
aspect of protection,
of defense and protection,
of the body protecting itself
from something.
It's a defensive response.
So a protective response
is a defensive response.
When you have-- this is
so important now, OK?
>>LISA: Mm-hm.
>>FUCHS: This is
the Gordian knot.
We're slicing through
for all disease.
When you have a
defensive response,
if you want to eliminate
that defensive response,
what's the number-one
thing you have to know?
What is the offending agent?
>>LISA: Stop eating it up, yes.
>>FUCHS: What is the offending
agent that's triggering
the defensive response?
Well, if you have a defensive
response in the body,
that means an offending agent
has gotten into the body.
So how do offending agents get
into-- this is all diseases
I'm talking about here--
how do offending agents
get into the body?
>>LISA: Well, you ingest them.
You breathe them.
Yeah.
>>FUCHS: You breathe
them to a certain extent.
You can inject them through
your skin to a certain extent.
But for the most part, what
do we do five times a day?
>>LISA: Eat.
>>FUCHS: Exactly.
What do we do way too much of?
Eat.
>>LISA: Eat.
>>FUCHS: And what are we eating?
Do you think we're eating
the same kind of food
our bodies crave and need and
desire and have grown up with?
>>LISA: It's whatever is
in front of us now, mm-hm.
>>FUCHS: And whatever is--
>>LISA: It's on the menu.
>>FUCHS: 90% of the food we
eat didn't exist 200 years ago.
So is it any wonder that
we have this epidemic?
If you understand this idea
of inflammation and immunity
and defense and protection
and offending agents
and you understand that all
of this begins in the gut
and the gut is the interface
between the outside world
and the inside
world, you can see
how it all boils down to
what's happening right here.
Now, this is just physical.
This is just physical.
And there are other things, too.
Like you have to know
how to breathe correctly.
And you got to be
moving your body.
But for the most part, if
you want to do one thing,
slice through that Gordian knot.
>>LISA: You mentioned fasting.
>>FUCHS: It's so important.
>>LISA: I want to
ask you about that.
Because if you like
slice the Gordian knot,
you're going to go right
to cleansing the body.
>>FUCHS: It's the
best way to cleanse.
>>LISA: But the question
is, you mentioned that we
have this defense system.
And have you ever
done a long fast?
>>FUCHS: Yes.
>>LISA: Obviously.
Does your body--
>>FUCHS: Well, I don't
know, three-day fast.
>>LISA: Three days.
>>FUCHS: Some people
do 40-day fasts.
>>LISA: In the beginning,
doesn't your body
tell you you need to eat?
>>FUCHS: It's conditioning.
>>LISA: Right.
>>FUCHS: It's not necessary.
We eat way too much.
And every time
you eat, your body
is spending its resources
to process that food.
Eating is one of the hardest
things that the body has to do.
Of the things the body
does on a regular basis,
eating is probably the hardest
thing that the body has to do.
So that's why every study that's
ever been done on longevity
shows the less you eat,
the longer you live.
So yes, every study.
>>LISA: That's a good point.
>>FUCHS: This is every study.
It's been repeated over
and over and over again.
And there's many
reasons for that.
Do you know that
when you don't eat,
your body produces a
hormone called ghrelin.
Have you heard of this?
>>LISA: Ghrelin?
>>FUCHS: Ghrelin.
G-H-R-E-L-I-N, ghrelin.
Have you heard of leptin?
>>LISA: Yes.
>>FUCHS: OK, so this is the
antagonistic hormone to leptin.
>>LISA: OK.
>>FUCHS: OK?
So ghrelin is a hormone that's
secreted when you're hungry.
>>LISA: Uh-huh.
>>FUCHS: It's an
appetite hormone.
>>LISA: Uh-huh.
>>FUCHS: When you're
ghrelin is high, that is,
when you're hungry
neurochemically,
you see colors more sharp.
You learn better.
>>LISA: Oh, that makes sense.
>>FUCHS: Your body is more
fine tuned when it's hungry.
When you sleep, when you eat--
>>LISA: Because
it wants to hunt.
>>FUCHS: It wants to hunt.
When you eat,
guess what happens?
>>LISA: It dims.
>>FUCHS: You slow down.
>>LISA: Leptin makes you tired.
Isn't it satiating?
>>FUCHS: Satiating.
But it's associated with a
slow down, with a shut down.
>>LISA: Oh, once you've
eaten, you're satiated
and you slow down.
>>FUCHS: Once you've
eaten, you're satiated.
You don't need to go and hunt.
>>LISA: Right.
>>FUCHS: So the longer you can
keep your body in this edge,
in this idea of I'm looking
for something, I'm hunting,
the sharper your colors are
going to be, the more acute
your smells are going to be.
You're going to be more alive.
You're going to sense
the environment better.
See, we get domesticated
through food.
Ghrelin makes you like a lion.
>>LISA: Very true, very true.
>>FUCHS: Leptin makes
you like a pussy cat.
>>LISA: Right
>>FUCHS: Our food, see, there's
a domestication of humanity
that's been occurring over
the last 10,000 years,
intentionally or
not intentionally.
>>LISA: Sedentary.
>>FUCHS: Grains, opiates,
the opiates of the people,
the comfort foods.
When we learned how
to crush up grains,
we learned how to ingest
large amounts of a food
that nature didn't
intend us to eat.
See grains are seeds.
Nature doesn't want
you to eat its seeds.
And we couldn't really get the
nutrition or the value of seeds
until we learned how to crush
them up about 10,000 years ago.
When they learned how
to crush up seeds,
that's when you got Sumeria.
That's when you got hierarchies.
That's when you
got a governments.
That's when you got
political systems.
That's when you
got people, elites,
that's when you got kings
who controlled the masses.
The masses had to dig the
ditches for the irrigation.
The elites weren't doing that.
So the stratification
of humanity
in terms of how people are
divided from elites to workers
to people in between began as we
learned how to process grains.
So all of this required
the people, workers.
People aren't naturally workers.
So they had to be domesticated.
They had to be enslaved.
They had to somehow
be controlled.
And food is a
great way to do it.
That's why you have
empires of food.
The greatest empires were the
Sumerian empire, the Babylonian
Empire, the Persian Empire,
the Egyptian empire,
the British empire, the Chinese
empire, the American empire.
What do all these
empires have in common?
They were all grain producers.
>>LISA: I was gonna say, seeds.
>>FUCHS: Lots of grains.
>>LISA: Right, right.
>>FUCHS: Because grains
represent wealth.
And grains also represent
a wonderful tool
to keep people dumb.
Now today, we have an
advanced version of grains.
We don't have just grains.
We got high-tech grains.
>>LISA: Yes.
>>FUCHS: We got super
high-processed foods.
Super high-processed foods--
>>LISA: Genetically
modified grains.
>>FUCHS: All of that.
And the super high-processed
foods are very grain rich,
by the way.
>>LISA: Yes.
>>FUCHS: And the super
high-processed foods
are all created by evil
geniuses, scientists,
who actually come up with
chemicals that will actually
make you love their food.
So they have chemicals
now that they can put on,
sprinkle on turds
and you will think
that is the most delicious
food you ever ate.
>>LISA: Oh, God.
>>FUCHS: I don't know
if I can say that.
>>LISA: That is crazy.
>>FUCHS: That's true.
>>FUCHS: Yes.
>>LISA: Yes.
>>FUCHS: And so those are
the high-tech versions
of processed food.
And, you know, in
the late 1800s,
we figured out chemistry.
We started to
understand chemistry.
In the early 1800s, we began it.
And now, you have these places
like the Monell Institute
in Philadelphia where they have
these high-powered PhDs who
come up with all
kinds of molecules
so you can't stop
eating the Lay's potato
chips or the cereals.
You wouldn't eat
any of these foods
if it didn't have all these
high-tech chemicals in them.
>>LISA: They're
on the foods now?
>>FUCHS: They're
in the foods now.
>>LISA: That's why you
can't eat just one.
>>FUCHS: That's why
you can't eat just one.
They compulse you to eat.
And this, getting back
your story about fasting,
is you have to take control.
And it begins with
understanding the mechanisms.
Like what is hunger, really?
See, the next time
you're really hungry,
check in with your body.
>>LISA: Uh-huh.
>>FUCHS: OK, listen to your
body and notice something.
After about two bites.
You don't want any more food.
>>LISA: Right.
>>FUCHS: Two bites.
>>FUCHS: Because you're done.
>>LISA: Yes.
>>FUCHS: Because that's
all your body wants
is two bites of food.
Now, think about it, you
just cooked the meal.
You're at a party.
You're talking.
You're on a date.
There's all these
reasons that are at play
to keep you eating
that have nothing to do
with your need for that food.
>>LISA: Right.
It's all socialization.
>>FUCHS: It's all of that,
conditioning, socialization,
boredom, you know, a
million reasons why.
>>LISA: I do intermittent
fasting a lot.
>>FUCHS: That's awesome.
>>LISA: And I noticed that after
I do the intermittent fasting--
>>FUCHS: You want
to eat a lot less.
>>LISA: --two days later, yes.
I look back and I say, oh
my god, what was I doing?
>>FUCHS: Yes.
>>LISA: What was I eating?
>>FUCHS: And then,
it takes one meal--
>>LISA: The food snuck back in.
>>FUCHS: It takes one
meal for you to go back.
>>LISA: One French fry.
>>FUCHS: Maybe one French fry
for you to go back, exactly.
>>LISA: I eat French fries.
So the cleansing--
>>FUCHS: Because we're
wired, we're hard
wired to look for calories.
And from an evolutionary
perspective--
>>LISA: Yes, that's the
one thing that happens
is that I crave carbs.
>>FUCHS: --we're
hard wired that way.
Because calories
represent reward.
To the body, a
calorie is a reward.
>>LISA: Oh.
>>FUCHS: That's why we
eat when we're bored
or when we're depressed.
Because a calorie is a
quick way to get a reward.
>>LISA: Or you
want to stay awake.
That's also another way to--
>>FUCHS: Well, calories,
maybe while you're eating.
>>LISA: To burn, yes.
>>FUCHS: While you're eating.
But then after
you're done eating,
you're gonna need a nap.
>>LISA: I want to ask you about
the cleansing of the blood.
>>FUCHS: Yes.
>>LISA: This is very important.
This idea of how we--
>>FUCHS: Dirty blood?
>>LISA: Yes.
>>FUCHS: OK.
>>FUCHS: So I talked about
the digestive system, right?
>>LISA: Yes
>>FUCHS: The reason
the digestive system
is so important is not because
of the digestive system
per se itself.
It's because of the link
that the digestive system
has to the sacred
space in the body.
The sacred space in
the body is the blood.
It's the bloodstream.
And the reason it's
the sacred space
is because this is the
part of the body that
touches everything.
It's connected to everything.
So if you have a
disease state, it
is always going to be
preceded by something
that's in the blood.
You cannot have a disease state
without some kind of blood
issue.
And the blood becomes
an issue from its link
to the digestive system.
And this is the relationship
between all of these systems
that seemingly are disparate
or are disconnected, is you
eat a food.
It goes into the gut, it
gets transmitted from--
and this is all--
I'm simplifying it.
Because how it happens
is ridiculously amazing.
OK, you eat a food.
It goes into your gut.
It crosses over into
your bloodstream.
From that point, it travels
everywhere in your body.
And this is why it says in the
Bible, the life of the body
is in the blood.
What's even more fascinating
is as the blood is circulating,
it's generating an
electrical charge.
And that electrical charge
is electrifying you.
As we get sick and as toxins
enter into the bloodstream,
the blood starts to get
sticky and coagulate.
Blood clotting is a
sign of protection.
Blood clotting, it's like
those little potato bugs.
You ever see those
little potato bugs?
>>LISA: Mm-hm.
>>FUCHS: I don't if
you ever did this,
but you poke it and it
curls up into a ball.
You know what I'm talking about?
>>LISA: Pill bugs we call them.
>>FUCHS: Pill bugs.
>>LISA: Yeah.
>>FUCHS: OK, so it
curls up in a ball.
The body does that, too.
When the body is freaked
out, it curls up into a ball.
And "curled up into a ball"
is kind of a metaphor.
So it doesn't really
literally curl up into a ball.
But everything kind
of closes down.
And so when toxins get
into the bloodstream,
the bloodstream
kind of closes down.
It becomes sludgy.
This is evolutionarily
appropriate
so the toxins don't get
delivered everywhere.
So you get this
condition of what I call
sticky blood or sludgy blood.
At that point you
have two problems.
Number one, you've got a
sludginess in the blood.
So the blood is not circulating.
It's not delivering
its nutrients.
It's not electrifying
the body as effectively.
It's not detoxifying
But number two, you
also have a condition
where you've got pieces
of food, literally,
they're small pieces of food--
>>LISA: So they permeate
through the gut?
>>FUCHS: They go
right through the gut.
That's called
leaky gut syndrome.
>>LISA: So that's a real thing?
>>FUCHS: Oh, big time.
There's no disease without it.
>>LISA: There was a debate.
And I--
>>FUCHS: There ain't no debate.
There ain't no debate.
This is where, when I talk about
the problem being in the gut,
I'm talking about leaky gut.
We didn't define that.
But that's what's happening.
The gut lining is breaking down.
Toxins are getting
into the blood.
There ain't no debate about it.
But here's what's interesting.
So number one, the blood reacts
by becoming sludgy and sticky.
And this is
evolutionarily appropriate
when it happens once in a while.
But in the long run, you
could run into issues.
Because you're not getting
nutrients delivered.
You're not getting
detoxified, a lot of problems.
You lose that electrical energy.
But the second issue
is so fascinating.
You get these little
pieces of food.
And technically, they
call them peptides,
little pieces of protein,
little pieces of your hamburger
and your soy and your beans and
your grains and all the foods,
they're now in your bloodstream.
And the body can't handle this.
This is a bad situation.
The blood is a sacred space.
No enemy gets into the blood.
What gets in the blood
is supposed to be vetted.
It's supposed to be approved
of, like immigration.
You know, your digestive tract
is supposed to be immigration,
checking people in.
When you get leaky
gut, there are
people going across the
border into the blood.
They're sneaking in.
So you got these pieces of
food that are floating around
inside the blood.
The body does something
very interesting, brilliance
of the body.
When I was a kid
and my mom would
tell me to make up my
room, clean up my room,
I had a really fancy,
really high-tech way
of cleaning up my room.
I shove everything
under the bed.
>>LISA: Right.
>>FUCHS: And my room was clean.
That was my way of
cleaning up the room.
Body does the same thing.
You get these
peptides that are--
>>LISA: Yes.
>>FUCHS: --floating
in the blood.
The body shoves them in
the connective tissue
and in the soft tissue of
the body to get it out.
Now, while the
little pieces of food
are floating around
in the bloodstream,
the immune system is doing
this really cool thing.
It's covering it up,
kind of protecting it.
It's like putting these immune
cells around the peptide,
around the food.
>>LISA: Ah, forming a barrier.
>>FUCHS: Forming a
barrier to protect it.
And these things that are
floating around in your blood
are called circulating
immune complexes or CICs.
Right?
So these circulating immune
complexes, these CICs get
shoved.
After they're in the
blood long enough,
they'll eventually get shoved
out into the connective tissue
and into the soft tissue of
the body where they can create
distortions at the
level of the soft tissue
and the level of
connective tissue.
>>LISA: Soft tissue
being the heart--
>>FUCHS: No.
>>LISA: --the liver, the gut.
>>FUCHS: Yeah, yeah,
the heart, too.
That's right.
But mostly it's like the liver
and the spleen and the lungs.
>>LISA: Gall bladder.
>>FUCHS: The gallbladder,
all these places.
It just gets deposited,
thyroid, the joints.
Now, you have a
condition in your thyroid
and your joints
and your tissues.
>>LISA: It can even be skin.
>>FUCHS: What's that?
Even skin, a lot.
Yes, absolutely.
That's correct, skin.
So now, you have a
condition in your skin,
your thyroid, and
your joints where
you have these circulating
immune complexes
and immune cells and
peptides from foods
and they're all
sitting in there.
They distort the thyroid.
They distort the joints.
They distort the skin.
So guess what?
>>LISA: Disease.
>>FUCHS: You have
an immune system
that says, enemy, distortion,
boom, let's attack it.
That's called an
autoimmune disease.
>>LISA: So when it attacks and
attacks and attacks and attacks
all the time.
>>FUCHS: All the time.
It happens once in a
while, that's one thing.
That's good.
>>LISA: Right.
>>FUCHS: It's great.
But with the chronic
ingestion of foods--
and nobody is telling us
this, so we don't know.
We're eating the same thing.
We don't know.
The doctors say, we don't
know why it causes psoriasis.
There's no cause
for the psoriasis.
>>LISA: Fix the problem.
>>FUCHS: There's no cause.
Yeah, here's a steroid cream.
There's no cause for
your hypothyroid.
There's no cause.
And there's no cure.
They love the word cure.
You know, if I were to say
cure, I would go to jail
or I would have my license
taken out if I said cure.
I say there's no-- forget
cure, that's magic.
I'm a scientist.
I'm not a magician here.
I say reversal.
>>LISA: Yes.
>>FUCHS: Not cure.
Let's reverse.
It's going this way,
let's take it this way.
>>LISA: That's a great concept.
But then, we have this whole
medicalization of society
where diseases are created
so that drugs can solve them.
>>FUCHS: Internet
shopping disorder,
have you heard of this one?
>>LISA: Internet shopping?
>>FUCHS: Internet,
that's a new disease.
My favorite one, oppositional
defiance disorder.
That's when you hate authority.
I have that one.
>>LISA: I was born with that.
>>FUCHS: Exactly, these are
real diseases that you can get
a prescription for--
>>LISA: Seriously?
>>FUCHS: --that you can go
ahead and get your insurance
company to pay for
your prescription for.
>>LISA: You can
get prescriptions--
>>FUCHS: Internet
shopping disorder.
>>LISA: --for internet shopping?
>>FUCHS: Yes.
Go check a book out
called the "DSM-III,"
"Diagnostic Statistics Manual."
There is a list of all
the psychiatric diagnoses
that you could possibly have.
And you know how
they make them up?
They sit around a table and
they vote on the different ones.
They used to have
homosexuality in there.
They don't have
that one anymore.
>>LISA: As a disease?
>>FUCHS: As a disease.
>>LISA: And then
they create a drug--
>>FUCHS: And they
create a drug for them.
I don't know if they had
a homosexuality drug.
But they did believe
it was a disease.
But the "DSM-III," and there's
other things like that, too.
Diagnosis, OK, we're talking
about diagnosis, right?
>>LISA: Yes.
>>FUCHS: Can we just
say about diagnosis?
>>LISA: Yes.
>>FUCHS: So people
become their diagnosis.
>>LISA: Yes.
>>FUCHS: The whole idea of the
Gordian knot is there's not
12--
I think you said
it earlier, there's
12,800 different diseases.
I don't know if you said that.
But that's--
>>LISA: You did, just now.
>>FUCHS: OK, I said it.
OK, so there's 12,800
different diseases,
right, according to the World
Health Organization diagnoses.
You got hidradenitis
suppurativa and fibromyalgia,
myasthenia gravis,
amyotrophic lateral sclerosis.
Here's the thing
about the diseases.
They're just descriptions of
what's happening in your body.
There's no disease per se.
There's just a description.
So fibromyalgia just means
you have muscle fiber pain.
Multiple sclerosis means that
your body is getting harder
in certain places.
It's sclerosing
>>LISA: What about
the myasthenia gravis?
>>FUCHS: Myasthenia gravis
is you have weak muscles.
"Gravis" means serious.
So it's serious.
"Myasthenia" means weak muscles.
You have seriously weak muscles.
>>LISA: But then--
>>FUCHS: Is that a disease?
No.
It means your body
is breaking down.
There's not 12,800
different diseases.
The body is just breaking down.
There's only one disease.
MBFA disease, my body is
falling apart disease.
That's the only
disease there is.
Your body's is
just deteriorating,
whether it's in your muscles
or whether it's in your nerves
or whether it's your eyeballs
or whether it's your knees.
It doesn't matter.
The body is breaking
down as a system.
And when the body breaks down
as a system, all you need to do
is figure out why it's
breaking down as a system
and then repair it.
You don't need a specialist
for this and a specialist
for that and a drug for
this and a drug for that.
You just need to figure out
what's wrong with the body.
>>LISA: Well, I mean the
drugs are miraculous.
What you say is they can
specifically target things.
>>FUCHS: The life-saving
are miraculous--
No, the lifesaving
drugs-- well, they're
miraculous in an evil
genius kind of way.
>>LISA: Right, that's
what I'm saying.
>>FUCHS: Yeah.
>>LISA: They're deceiving
is what I should say.
They really--
>>FUCHS: There's a miraculous
thing to them, absolutely.
But they're not going
to help your body.
Because the only thing that's
wrong with your body is--
this is Gordian knot again--
the wrong stuff is getting
in, the right stuff isn't.
That's it.
>>LISA: OK, so,
for example, if you
have one of these diseases like
MS, your age is affecting it.
You've got autoimmune.
There are so many--
>>FUCHS: And there's the
water you're drinking,
the air that you breathe,
and there's all of that.
>>LISA: Right.
>>FUCHS: But
there's places where
you have locus of control.
>>LISA: OK.
>>FUCHS: You don't
have a locus of control
over the air you're breathing.
We're gonna breathe our air.
OK, we have a starting point.
We'll play the
hands we're dealt.
We're dealt a certain
hand because we
live in 21st century America.
So you're not going to
make it to 120 or 130
because you live in
21st century America.
However, you have
tremendous locus of control.
Because if you
understand everything
we just talked about in
the last 20 minutes or so,
you understand that all disease
has this aspect of protection.
All disease has this
aspect of a response.
All disease has this aspect
of the body trying to defend
itself from something.
The only question
has to be, if you're
dealing with a disease
state, is what is your body
protecting itself from?
And how can you strengthen
it and support it
so, number one, it doesn't
have to deal with whatever it's
dealing with and, number two,
it can deal with whatever
it has to deal with.
>>LISA: What if it's
a genetic illness?
>>FUCHS: Then you get the whole
disempowerment of genetics.
>>LISA: Disempowerment?
>>FUCHS: Yes.
This idea that we are
victims of our genetics
takes our power away from us.
Now, are you born with
certain things happening?
Perhaps.
But, you see, there is something
that's transcendent to genetics
that people are
talking about now.
But we learned about in
pharmacy school in the 1980s,
it's called epigenetics.
You see, if you take
a bone cell and put it
in an environment that
has all of the nutrients
for it to be a skin cell,
it'll turn into a skin cell.
>>LISA: Mm-hm.
>>FUCHS: So you're
not condemned.
A bone cell is not
condemned to be a bone cell.
It can be a skin cell if it
has the right environment.
The environment tells
the genes what to do.
So the environment,
by environment
I'm talking about
the environment
the cell is sitting in.
All our cells are
sitting in a soup.
And they're reading the soup.
Guess what they're mainly
reading the soup for?
You'll love this.
They're mainly reading
the soup for what
Albert Einstein
says it was the one
question he wanted to ask God.
>>LISA: What?
>>FUCHS: He said, is the
universe a friendly place?
>>LISA: Oh.
>>FUCHS: He said, if I could
ask God, I would ask him,
is the universe a
friendly place, right?
>>LISA: Yes.
>>FUCHS: That's what
every cell is asking.
Is the universe
a friendly place?
It's asking it by
reading the environment.
It's reading carbon dioxide.
It's reading food toxins.
It's reading insulin.
It's reading vitamins and
amino acids and nutrients.
It's saying, do I
have the resources
that will allow me to thrive
or am I in survival mode?
See, at any given
moment, any living system
is either thriving or surviving.
>>LISA: Right.
.
>>FUCHS: It's not doing--
>>LISA: Both at the same time.
>>FUCHS: Well, I don't
want to say that.
Because if you're
thriving, you're surviving.
But if your focus
only on survival,
you're not going to
be able to thrive.
OK, so--
>>LISA: You can't be in growth
and death at the same time.
>>FUCHS: It can't be in
growth and protection
at the same time.
You can't be safe and also
thriving at the same time.
Thriving--
>>LISA: Let's go back
to MS for a minute.
>>FUCHS: OK, so MS. So
MS, like all diseases,
is a defensive response.
>>LISA: Mm-hm.
>>FUCHS: OK, It's the
body is defending itself
from something.
Technically, they call
it an autoimmune disease.
>>LISA: Right.
>>FUCHS: So it's a sign
that the immune system
is in protective mode.
It's defending itself
from something.
And we could say MS,
but this is true about
all autoimmune diseases, OK?
And this is really important.
>>LISA: Right
>>FUCHS: Because there's
100 million people that
have these things.
>>LISA: Yes.
>>FUCHS: OK, an
autoimmune disease
means the immune system
is in hyperactive mode.
>>LISA: Uh-huh.
>>FUCHS: It's jumpy.
It's jumping on things.
It's moving.
The immune system is
your defensive system.
It's your protective system.
When a defensive system
or a protective system
is doing its work too well
or its over-protecting,
what's the one
thing you ask if you
want to readjust the situation?
Why?
What is it attacking?
>>LISA: Yes.
>>FUCHS: What is it--
>>LISA: Yes, what's the invader?
>>FUCHS: What's the invader?
So let's backtrack.
How do invaders get
into the system?
>>LISA: Food.
>>FUCHS: Always.
>>LISA: Mm-hm.
>>FUCHS: Now you can start
an autoimmune disease
by vaccinations or by sticking
something in your veins.
There are autoimmune
diseases that
have been known to happen
if you inject things
through your skin, likely
through your nose as well.
But what's the most common
place we put things into--
>>LISA: Food.
>>FUCHS: Through food.
So you say, OK,
that's a great theory.
How are you going to prove it?
Fast for two days.
And if you have MS or
an autoimmune disease,
you will notice your symptoms
improve in two or three
days of fasting.
>>LISA: Ah, that's true.
>>FUCHS: Across the board.
>>LISA: That's true.
>>FUCHS: Hidden in plain sight.
>>LISA: Mm-hm.
>>FUCHS: Even on
WebMD's web site.
You know WebMD,
right, the website?
>>LISA: Mm-hm.
>>FUCHS: So they are no
fans of, you know, anything
I'm talking about here probably.
But they have an
article that says
fasting relieves multiple
sclerosis symptoms.
But if you understand
what I just
said, which is not rocket
science, which doesn't req--
did I say anything
medical or scientific
or hard to understand?
>>LISA: It's interesting, yes.
Now, is fasting meaning just
water or how do you do it?
>>FUCHS: To the
degree you can fast.
>>LISA: OK.
>>FUCHS: Calorie restriction
if you can't fast.
>>LISA: Right.
>>FUCHS: You know,
fasting is great
because you mobilize hormones
and chemistry in the body,
like we were saying, that tells
the body, let's get going.
>>LISA: Grow.
>>FUCHS: Let's move.
Let's grow.
>>LISA: Yeah,
let's heal, repair.
>>FUCHS: So you can go out
and let's heal, let's repair.
So fasting is great.
But even if you do
caloric restriction.
>>LISA: OK.
So I have to do some--
I have to ask you about
some of these myths.
Let's just go through, if
we can, really quickly.
Serotonin, SSRIs.
>>FUCHS: OK, serotonin
gets the reputation
of being the happy
hormone, right?
If you're a layperson, you
think it's with happiness.
Not a happy hormone.
It's a vigilance hormone.
It's a daytime hormone.
It balances out or
antagonizes melatonin.
Serotonin and melatonin
are two of the same family.
And they balance each other out.
And serotonin is a very,
very primitive hormone.
Yeast have serotonin.
Bacteria has serotonin.
So serotonin is an
awareness hormone.
It helps you handle the
vicissitudes, the ups and downs
of life, the ups and downs
of being in daily life.
During the daytime, there's
all kinds of things happening.
Sleep, you don't have
to worry about it.
Sleep, you're growing,
you're repairing.
You're chill.
You're at night.
Nothing's happening.
But in the day, you
need to be aware.
You need to be vigilant.
Most serotonin in your
body is not your brain.
It's in your digestive system.
Why your digestive system?
Why would serotonin, which
is a vigilance hormone
and an awareness
hormone, why would it
be in your digestive system?
Because your digestive system
is in the greatest battle
there is with the environment.
Because you're
constantly eating.
>>LISA: That's why they
call it the gut-brain.
>>FUCHS: It's called
the gut-brain axis.
But this is the core of it.
You know, our brain
here is important.
But the brain here
is interpreting
the environment via the food.
So serotonin is a
digestive hormone
more than it is a brain hormone.
>>LISA: Interesting.
>>FUCHS: Vastly,
not a little bit,
like 97% of the
serotonin in your body
is in your digestive tract.
So it's a digestive hormone
because the digestive system
needs this vigilance aspect.
So SSRIs are a
recipe for disaster.
Now, if somebody is depressed--
And I've done talks where
I've talked about SSRIs
and it being problematic.
But if somebody is depressed,
it's hard to say to them,
don't take your Zoloft
or don't take your--
I mean, "I'm gonna kill myself
if I don't have my Zoloft."
>>LISA: Right.
>>FUCHS: So, you know, I think
everybody's number-one health
goal should be to wean
themselves off of it.
But you can't say
that to somebody
who's got mental health
issues and these things
are somehow stabilizing them.
However, what you
can do is you can
start to create other avenues to
approach the health challenge.
So for depression,
you can do movement.
That's a great way to
up-regulate happy hormones
in the brain, not
serotonin, necessarily,
but dopamine and norepinephrine.
>>LISA: Norepinephrine.
>>FUCHS: Exactly.
So movement is a
very important thing
if you're dealing
with depression.
Foods, of course, are
a very important thing.
Keeping your blood sugar
stable is important.
There are nutrients
that you can do.
So I'm always hesitant
to say to somebody,
don't take your Zoloft or
don't take your Effexor.
But what I prefer
to say is, maybe
there's other things
that you can do,
if you so desire,
to wean yourself
off your Effexor or your Zoloft.
>>LISA: You covered a
little bit of the SSRI.
And now the--
>>FUCHS: Thyroid?
>>LISA: --whole thyroid, yeah.
>>FUCHS: The thyroid thing.
Here's the thing
about the thyroid, OK.
And it always amazes me
that the thyroid medicine
is like the number
three or number four
medicine every year.
Because every pharmacist knows
they're the most useless drugs.
And this is why people
on thyroid medication
have to keep
changing their dose.
>>LISA: Tell us why.
>>FUCHS: Because you
can't control the thyroid
without controlling
the preceding organs.
The thyroid is a secondary
system in the sense
that it's reflective of what's
happening in the blood sugar
system, specifically the stress
system, the blood sugar system,
and the digestive system.
I call this the
triangle of disease.
There are three points
of bodily breakdown
that underlie all
disease states.
And that's the
digestive system, which
we've talked about, and then
the blood sugar system, and then
the body's stress
management system.
The thyroid is
reflective of what's
happening at those
three levels so
that when your cortisol, your
body's stress hormone, is high,
your body will compensate by
slowing down thyroid function.
When your blood
sugar is messed up
and when your digestive
system is messed up,
likewise, your thyroid
will slow down.
So to try to approach the
thyroid by itself by giving
hormones is not going to work.
Because the problem is
not at the thyroid level.
>>LISA: So then how do you
regulate the blood sugar?
>>FUCHS: Well, you want to
work with the triangle, first
of all.
>>LISA: OK.
>>FUCHS: And so the triangle
means work with cortisol.
>>LISA: OK.
>>FUCHS: First and foremost,
slow, deep breathing.
Relax the body.
Make sure you're not putting--
>>LISA: Parasympathetic
nervous system.
>>FUCHS: That's where the
parasympathetic nervous
system-- activate the
parasympathetic nervous system.
Take a hot shower.
We talked about that earlier.
If you can sit in a bath.
Simply that alone will activate
the parasympathetic nervous
system.
Gratitude activates the
parasympathetic nervous system.
Love activates the
Bodily relaxation activates the
parasympathetic nervous system.
Anything you do to activate the
That's step number one.
Step number two is you
stabilize the blood sugar.
Really, when you talk about
stabilizing the blood sugar,
the most important
aspect of that
is keeping your insulin low,
keeping your insulin sharp so
that your cells are all
responsive to insulin.
The biggest disease
on the planet
that's behind heart
disease and behind cancer,
which is supposedly
the first two diseases,
is diabetes or
insulin resistance.
Not type one diabetes,
but type two diabetes,
which is insulin resistance.
So what you want to
do is you want make
your insulin really strong.
>>LISA: So insulin regulates
the blood sugar, right?
>>FUCHS: Insulin regulates
the blood sugar, correct.
When you eat sugar,
your insulin goes up.
And then the job of
insulin is to open up cells
so sugar can get
stashed into the cells.
Then your blood sugar goes down.
And then you eat more.
So your insulin goes up.
And then your blood sugar
gets, your sugar gets--
>>LISA: How do you
keep it active?
>>FUCHS: You sensitize it.
You want to make your
cells sensitive to insulin.
You do it by keeping
your insulin down.
It's kind of like--
>>LISA: How?
>>FUCHS: Did you
ever go to a concert
where the music is really
loud and, gradually, it
doesn't seem as loud anymore?
Your body adjusts to it.
It turns the volume
down on the music.
And this is one of the
ways the body works.
It's a compensatory mechanism.
So over the course
of time when insulin
is kind of going up and
down and up and down,
a lot of this insulin present,
the cells lose their ability
to sense insulin.
They become insulin resistant.
So what does that tell you?
If you want to resensitize
your body to insulin,
lower your insulin.
And this is why fasting
is so important.
>>LISA: Again.
>>FUCHS: Again, again fasting.
And if you don't want
to fast, reducing foods
that spike your insulin.
The most important
insulin-spiking foods are
the foods we all
love, the breads--
>>LISA: Carbohydrates.
>>FUCHS: --and the
grains, the carbohydrates
and the sweets and the sugar.
And today, you can't go 30
feet without finding a source
of these kinds of foods.
>>LISA: Right.
>>FUCHS: And if you are
in a state of low reward,
low dopamine-- because
sugar, calories,
and carbs are
attached to reward.
And you're constantly
looking for reward
because you don't have
reward in your life.
Because you ever notice how,
and I don't if you noticed this,
but when you're in
love, you don't eat.
>>LISA: Mm-hm.
>>FUCHS: Right?
You know that kind of
myth or meme about--
>>LISA: Constant dopamine rush.
>>FUCHS: You constantly
are in reward.
You already have the reward.
>>LISA: Yeah.
>>FUCHS: When you have reward
going, you don't need to eat.
So get reward somewhere
else is one of the best ways
to resensitize
yourselves to insulin.
But in general, keeping
your carbs down.
Going ketogenic is a
great strategy, too.
>>LISA: So proteins,
rich greens--
>>FUCHS: Proteins get
turned into sugar.
So you got to be--
>>LISA: They do?
>>FUCHS: Yeah, very quickly.
>>LISA: Proteins
get turned to sugar?
>>FUCHS: Yes, very quickly.
>>LISA: I thought carbs
got turned into sugar.
>>FUCHS: They do.
Carbs are sugar.
>>LISA: Right.
>>FUCHS: And carbs
break down into sugar.
But protein, the
body is very clever.
And it can efficiently,
quite efficiently
actually, turn
protein into sugar.
So if you're eating--
and a lot of people
make this mistake
when they go paleo
or they eat a lot of
protein, is they think,
oh, I'll just eat
a lot of steak.
And they don't lose weight.
And they can't figure out
why I'm not losing weight.
Because your body is turning
that protein into sugar,
which ends up as fat.
>>LISA: Is the body going
to turn anything into sugar
if you don't give it sugar?
Because it needs--
>>FUCHS: Um, yes.
>>LISA: glycogen.
>>FUCHS: No, no.
Because it can burn fat.
That's what the
ketogenic diet is.
>>LISA: OK.
>>FUCHS: So it can burn fat.
And your goal is to be fat
burner, not a sugar burner.
Fat is a much cleaner, more
dense source of energy.
This is why the ketogenic diet
is so helpful and so important.
Because it's a fat-burning diet.
So you want to
encourage the body
to get its energy from
fat as much as possible.
And the way you do that is
by keeping your carbs out
as best as possible and
keeping your protein low.
You need protein
for other things.
So you got have some
amount of protein.
But keeping the carbs
down to a minimum.
There's no real need for carbs.
You need fat and
you need protein.
But there's no real
need for carbs.
Now, I'm not saying
go to zero carb.
Because carbs are a
good source of energy.
And there's
phytonutrients and things
associated with the carbs.
So that's the second point
of the triangle of disease,
is the blood sugar.
And then the third point
is the digestive system.
But here's where it
gets really interesting.
So you got a triangle, right?
Digestion, which breaks down
woefully early by the way,
like in the womb or at birth
or within the first year
of the child's life his
or her digestive system
is breaking down.
That's what colic is.
Colic is the digestive system
starting to break down.
Eczema, pimples,
there's all these things
that happen to kids
are manifestations
of the digestive
system breaking down.
That's a whole other story.
>>LISA: Yes.
>>FUCHS: But here's
where it gets cool.
So the digestive system,
when it breaks down,
it creates changes
in blood sugar.
Diabetes has behind it
digestive issues, by the way.
So--
>>LISA: Mm-hm, everything does.
>>FUCHS: Everything does.
>>LISA: It's all going back to--
That's what I'm telling you.
>>LISA: I see what
you're saying.
>>FUCHS: And then
you go into cortisol.
But here's where it
gets interesting.
So the cortisol spikes and
that will cause your thyroid
to slow down.
But here's where it
becomes interesting.
The thyroid regulates
the digestive system.
So when the thyroid
slows down, now you
have even slower
digestive functioning--
>>LISA: Ah.
>>FUCHS: --which leads to more
blood sugar problems, which
leads to more cortisol.
And you get this
downward spiral.
And most people are in this
from birth until the time
that their disease hits
at the age of 30 or 40.
And this is all
percolating underneath.
And people are like, well, I was
just sitting there watching TV,
minding my own business, and
all of a sudden, I got cancer.
And all of a sudden,
I got arthritis.
And all of sudden, I
got hypothyroidism.
And all of a sudden, I
got these disease states,
not knowing that
this triangle has
been in effect their entire life
where the digestive system is
broken down.
And the blood sugar system
is starting to lose control.
And you're chronically
spiking cortisol.
Your thyroid is slowing down.
And this whole thing happens.
By the way, behind
all disease states,
you'll find this
triangle of disease
and you'll find hypothyroidism.
And you don't need
a thyroid test.
You don't have to waste your
time with a thyroid test.
>>LISA: Just go
right towards this.
>>FUCHS: How is your
body performing?
If your body is
underperforming in any way,
rest assured, you've
got a thyroid problem,
whether it's tested or not.
>>LISA: Right, I get it.
So this goes back to
how we heal disease.
And Ben has this great
video here talking about,
we are not our diagnosis.
Take a look at this.
>>FUCHS: One of the
most fundamental ideas
is the fact that what
you're diagnosed with
is not the problem in terms of
reversing your health issue.
Medical diagnoses are
conveniences that doctors
use to explain symptomology.
And we get obsessed
with symptomology
and end up marginalizing or
being dismissive of causes.
In other words, we have
a pharmaco-medical model
that treats symptoms
as if they were
the diseases, that
treats symptoms
as if those were the problems.
The symptom may be
problematic in terms
of how you live your life.
But as far as reversing
the symptomology,
your diagnosis doesn't matter.
The breakdowns in the
body are always generic.
And whether it shows
up as osteoporosis
or autoimmune disease or
skin diseases or cancer,
you're always going
to see the same things
underneath or behind all
the various symptomologies
that are associated with
these different diagnoses.
And if you want to
reverse the disease state,
it doesn't matter
what the diagnosis is.
And it doesn't even matter
what the symptomology is.
What matters is the cause.
If you have a tree that is
producing rotten fruit or moldy
leaves, you don't
spray the leaves.
You don't correct the
problem at the level
of the fruit or the leaf.
You correct the problem
at the level of the soil.
>>LISA: So if we are
not our diagnosis,
then how do we address illness?
What should we do?
>>FUCHS: That's great.
>>LISA: We've talked
about what not to do.
What do we do?
>>FUCHS: Gordian
knot, Gordian knot.
You start off with food.
Eat way less food, way less.
>>LISA: What kind?
>>FUCHS: You know what?
Even before that,
listen to your body.
Understand that your body is
always communicating to you.
>>LISA: Sleep when you're tired.
>>FUCHS: All of that.
All of that, chop
wood, carry water.
You know, all of that.
Listen to your body,
the simple things.
Just listen to your body.
Our body is always
communicating.
You know, the next
time you have,
I don't know if you
like Snickers bars.
That's my little
thing, a Snickers bar.
Ok.
>>LISA: We've just had this
whole health show and you tell
me a Snicker's bar--
>>FUCHS: No I don't eat them.
But that's my, if
I was going to--
>>LISA: Oh, OK.
>>FUCHS: That's
my-- you know, that
would be what I think
of as the junk food is
I think would think of Snickers
bars or cigarettes or soda
or whatever it is,
something that you
know that you shouldn't do,
but you really want to do.
>>LISA: OK.
>>FUCHS: I don't
know what yours is.
French fries, you were saying.
>>LISA: Yeah.
>>FUCHS: OK, so the next time
you have a French fry, OK--
>>LISA: Yeah.
>>FUCHS: --take the
French fry and then
pull it out and put the
salt and the ketchup and all
the deliciousness and look at
that golden, crunchy yumminess
of whatever it is that you like.
And then raise it your
mouth very slowly.
And as you're raising
it your mouth, listen.
And I guarantee, you will a
hear a voice go, "no, Lisa, no."
Am I right?
>>LISA: Happens all the time.
>>FUCHS: It happens
all the time.
>>LISA: Of course, yes.
>>FUCHS: But the
reason I know that is
because I have that voice.
>>LISA: OK.
>>FUCHS: And we all
have that voice.
And that voice is
always talking to you.
And it will tell you to
turn left at the corner
or right at the corner.
>>LISA: Yeah, that's true.
>>FUCHS: Everything.
And it's called the
still, small voice.
And it's been known about.
And this voice has
been known about.
And it's almost like, you can
give it a Christian metaphor.
You can say it's Jesus.
You can say it's God.
You could say it's spirit.
You could say whatever it is.
And we don't listen.
And that's the one thing.
The body has a
wisdom built into it
that it wants to share with us.
And it will tell us
everything we need to know.
So that's even before we
get into what you can do.
Number one, listen to your body.
So then, specifically,
listen for foods.
Stay away from foods
that are problematic.
If a food makes you feel
tired, don't eat it.
If a food is associated
with-- and then
see how you feel
after you eat a food.
You know, it's one thing
to say if a food makes
you feel tired, don't eat it.
But at least notice.
Even before you
decide not to eat,
at least notice that after
you eat a certain food,
you're tired.
Or after you eat a certain
food, you get a rash.
Or after you eat
a certain food--
>>LISA: Right.
>>FUCHS: --your blood
pressure goes up.
Or after eat a certain food,
you don't feel good in any way.
Pay attention.
Lay off the problem foods.
That's number one.
And eat less food.
Number two, don't
spike your blood sugar.
Try to stay with
foods that don't
make your blood sugar go up.
And eat foods that help
control your blood sugar
like fiber foods.
Foods that have a
lot of fiber in them
will keep your
blood sugar stable.
Stay away from fruit
juices or foods
that have super-high
concentrations of sugar
without the fiber,
processed foods.
>>LISA: Coffee not a thing?
>>FUCHS: I don't want to get
into like yes, no, good, bad.
>>LISA: OK.
>>FUCHS: Because, you know,
I don't feel comfortable
saying this is a good food
and this is a bad food.
Whatever you feel right for you.
But just listen.
Stay away from things
that cause your blood
sugar to go up and down.
And you'll know blood
sugar drops by fatigue.
You'll know blood sugar gets
too high by jittery and anxiety.
Number three, and maybe
the most important,
because we can do this right
away, lower your cortisol.
Do all the things you could
do to relax your body.
Number four, move your body.
Move the lymphatic system.
The body loves quick
bursts of movement followed
by long, luscious rest.
We don't mind working.
We just want to
work all the time.
>>LISA: Right.
>>FUCHS: Because the
body likes to work.
>>LISA: It does.
>>FUCHS: It just doesn't
want to work all the time.
And it doesn't need a lot.
It needs five
minutes of intensity.
And the best way to
exercise, by the way,
is intense exercise
for five minutes a day.
Which is kind of
cool, because then you
have a lot more time to rest.
You don't have to stay
in the gym for an hour
or half an hour.
>>LISA: That's great.
That's it?
Five minutes?
>>FUCHS: Five minutes a day.
If you could do five minutes
a day everyday, great.
>>LISA: Of burst exercise?
>>FUCHS: Intense.
And you know it's exercise
because your body is saying
we don't need to do this.
>>LISA: Stop.
>>FUCHS: Right.
Your body is saying we
don't need to do this.
It's not even your body.
It's your mind that's saying
we don't need to do this.
But anyway, so quick
burst of exercise.
And then number four,
make sure you're
leveraging your mental
and emotional powers.
Do not underestimate it.
Your mental and
emotional natures
are linked to the physical
body from the hormones.
So your body is the
end result of what
you're thinking and feeling and
the hormones you're producing.
Don't underestimate
the power of your mind
and the power of your feelings
and the power of your emotions.
It's unbelievably important.
And then, I say last, but
it's certainly not least.
It's the most important.
It's your spirituality.
And by that, I mean
your connection.
>>LISA: With each other?
>>FUCHS: Every connection.
Separation is an illusion.
And it is the ultimate sin.
It is original sin.
It is this idea that we live
in a world where we're separate
and where I'm separate
from the universe.
Because that's where
fear comes from.
If I believe that I'm alone
and marooned in this universe
and everything is
around me and I'm here,
and that's what
most of us believe
and that's the way
most of us think,
obviously, I'm gonna be
in a defensive posture.
I can't help it.
I mean, I have to be
in a defensive posture.
Because the world can
come crashing down on me.
But if we believe what is really
true at the quantum level,
and even if you use
your imagination,
you can see that I'm being
created in your brain
right now.
And you're being created
in my brain right now.
And there's a oneness
that's a place that's
not only scientifically
valid, but also common sense
tells you that.
If you could truly
live in that place,
that will allow your
sympathetic nervous system
to stand down, your emergency
system, your defensive system
to stand down.
And ultimately, that's
what it's all about.
>>LISA: It seems like it.
>>FUCHS: In Christianity,
they say you have to be saved.
I say you have to be safe.
You have to tell the
body it's safe so that it
can thrive and do its growth.
>>LISA: Yes, safety is huge.
>>FUCHS: Safety, the body
has to know it's safe.
>>LISA: It seems there's so
much that you've taught us here.
But it seems that's
the key there,
is to really understand
the psychological aspects
of disease and illness.
>>FUCHS: Yes.
>>LISA: And I got to ask
you, why do you do this?
What is your biggest why?
>>FUCHS: What is my biggest why?
>>LISA: In all
that you do, yeah.
>>FUCHS: You know, if you
don't stand for something,
you'll fall for everything.
The only way to live an
effective, powerful life, which
is what I want to do is live
a power-- is take a stand.
And not only to take
a stand for yourself,
but if you really believe
in what you're doing,
to take a stand for humanity,
to take a stand for everybody.
And I find that when
I do that for myself,
my dopamine goes up.
My oxytocin goes up.
>>LISA: Yes.
>>FUCHS: My hormones
are more equipped
to have a beautiful,
healthy, wonderful life.
So in a way, it's self-serving.
But I love how the
universe is set
up so that when we really,
truly serve ourselves,
we'll end up serving everybody.
>>LISA: Well--
>>FUCHS: When we truly
end up serving everybody,
we'll really truly
serve ourselves.
>>LISA: That's clear because
you are doing what you love.
And we can tell it.
>>FUCHS: Thank you,
I appreciate that.
>>LISA: Yes.
Thank you so much for empowering
us with so much health
information.
And thank you for watching.
If you'd like to watch more
inspirational interviews,
you can check them out at
"Inspirations" on Gaia.
I am Lisa Garr.
And until next time, I
invite you to stay aware.
[MUSIC PLAYING]